Taxon Name: Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris (Linnaeus, 1766)
Synonym(s):
• Hydrochaeris hydrochaeris (Linnaeus, 1766)
• Sus hydrochaeris Linnaeus, 1766
Common Name(s):
• English: Capybara
Taxonomic Notes:
Also known as Hydrochaeris hydrochaeris and Hydrochoeris hydrochaeris.
Geographic Range
Range Description:
This species has a broad distribution that spans east of the Andes in Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador,
Peru, the Guyanas, all of Brazil, eastern Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and northwestern and eastern
Argentina (Lacher 2016).
Country Occurrence:
Native: Argentina; Bolivia, Plurinational States of; Brazil; Colombia; Ecuador; Guyana; Paraguay; Peru;
Uruguay; Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Population
It is locally common and widespread, but uncommon or rare in populated areas of the Amazon
(Emmons and Feer 1999). Populations in the rainforest are small and narrowly restricted to open
watersides (Emmons and Feer 1999). Home range size is dependent upon the quality of habitat, and can
vary from 10 ha in resource rich areas to over 200 ha in more resource poor areas. In the Brazilian
Pantanal, densities can reach 15 animals per hectare (Lacher 2016). In some areas of Bolivia the species
are abundant however in the central distribution their numbers are declining (an estimation of 0.4 to
0.59 ind./km) with small groups of one to seven maximum individuals (Guizada-Duran and Aliaga-Rossel
2014).
Current Population Trend: Stable
Habitat and Ecology (see Appendix for additional information)
The species occurs only in habitat close to water including marshes, estuaries, and along rivers and
streams (Eisenberg and Redford 1999). Depending on habitat and hunting pressure, they are found
singly or socially. They are diurnal or nocturnal depending on hunting pressure and the season
(Eisenberg and Redford 1999). In Venezuela and the Brazilian Pantanal, the species breeds throughout
the year, usually with a single breeding cycle. Gestation lasts up to 120 days after which an average of
3.5 young are born (range, one to seven), the peak birth period is during February in the Brazilian
Pantanal (Eisenberg and Redford 1999). They live in large groups of extended family members, with
group size varying from 2 to 30 individuals with one dominant breeding male. The mating system is one
of resource defence polygyny, where males defend access to foraging resources associated with bodies
of water (Lacher 2016).
Systems: Terrestrial, Freshwater
Use and Trade
The Capybara is hunted for its leather.
Threats (see Appendix for additional information)
The primary threat is hunting for meat and leather, but there are a number of captive populations that
have reduced demand; however some local populations have been extirpated (Eisenberg and Redford
1999). Capybara leather is valued in South America and from 1976 to 1979 almost 80,000 skins were
exported from Argentina (Eisenberg and Redford 1999). There is a large internal market for the skins. In
Peru and Bolivia some Capybaras are hunted and used for bait (Guizada-Duran and Aliaga-Rossel 2014).
Conservation Actions (see Appendix for additional information)
The species occurs in many protected areas throughout its range.