Feeding
Anacondas are apex predators with a wide variety of prey, almost anything they can overpower, including fish, amphibians, birds, various mammals and other reptiles. Particularly large anacondas may consume tapirs, deer, peccaries, capybaras, jaguars, and caimans, but such large meals are rare. Juvenile anacondas feed on small birds and young caiman typically 40–70 grams (1.4–2.5 oz) in weight. As they develop, their diet becomes increasingly complex. Prey availability varies more in grasslands than in river basins. 
In both habitats green anacondas have been found to feed on large prey, usually 14–50% of their own mass. Examples of prey include broad-snouted caimans, spectacled caimans, yacare caimans, black caimans, smooth-fronted caimans, wattled jacanas, capybaras, red-rumped agoutis, collared peccaries, South American tapirs, boa constrictors, brown-banded water snakes, green iguanas, cryptic golden tegus, scorpion mud turtles, gibba turtles, Arrau turtles, savanna side-necked turtles, red side-necked turtles, and northern pudús.  Capybaras are common prey for the green anaconda.
Large prey occasionally cause serious injuries and death. This risk is likely reduced when anacondas can drown the prey. Some feed on carrion and conspecifics, usually inside or around water. Large anacondas can go weeks to months without food after a large meal, because they have a low metabolism. Females have increased postpartum feeding to recover from their reproductive investment.
Many local stories and legends report anacondas feeding on humans, but there is little evidence of this. Cannibalism among green anacondas is known. Most recorded cases involving a larger female consuming a smaller male. Scientists hypothesize several explanations, including the great sexual dimorphism of the species, and a female's need for food after breeding to sustain the long gestation. The nearby male simply provides the opportunistic female a ready source of nutrition.
In southeastern Peru, potential prey of green anacondas include collared peccaries, lowland pacas, brocket deer (Mazama sp.), brown agoutis, cocoi herons, neotropical otters, gold tegus, spectacled caiman, and giant otters. Observations show that green anacondas may climb to the top of trees for prey such as green iguanas and brown-throated sloths, demonstrating the willingness to leave their preferred habitat for prey. Green anacondas may even target domestic prey, including domestic dogs, chickens, cattle, domestic cats, and wild boar.