Hunting and diet
The jaguar is an obligate carnivore and depends solely on flesh for its nutrient requirements. The daily food requirement of a captive jaguar weighing 34 kg (75 lb) was estimated at 1.4 kg (3.1 lb) of meat.
An analysis of 53 studies documenting the diet of the jaguar revealed that its prey ranges in weight from 1 to 130 kg (2.2 to 286.6 lb); it prefers prey weighing 45–85 kg (99–187 lb), with the capybara and the giant anteater being the most selected. When available, it also preys on marsh deer, southern tamandua, collared peccary and black agouti. In floodplains, it opportunistically takes reptiles such as green anaconda, caiman and turtle species. In the Brazilian Pantanal, it primarily feeds on aquatic reptiles and fish including thorny catfish, small-scaled pacu, red-bellied piranha and barred catfish.
It also preys on livestock in cattle ranching areas where wild prey is scarce.
The jaguar's bite force allows it to pierce the carapaces of the yellow-spotted Amazon river turtle and the yellow-footed tortoise. It employs an unusual killing method: it bites mammalian prey directly through the skull between the ears to deliver a fatal bite to the brain. It kills capybara by piercing its canine teeth through the temporal bones of its skull, breaking its zygomatic arch and mandible and penetrating its brain, often through the ears.
It has been hypothesized to be an adaptation to cracking open turtle shells; armored reptiles may have formed an abundant prey base for the jaguar following the late Pleistocene extinctions. However, this is disputed, as even in areas where the jaguar preys on reptiles, it more frequently takes mammals in spite of the greater reptile abundance.
Between October 2001 and April 2004, 10 jaguars were monitored in the southern Pantanal. In the dry season from April to September, they killed prey at intervals ranging from one to seven days; and ranging from one to 16 days in the wet season from October to March.
The jaguar uses a stalk-and-ambush strategy when hunting rather than chasing prey. The cat will slowly walk down forest paths, listening for and stalking prey before rushing or ambushing. The jaguar attacks from cover and usually from a target's blind spot with a quick pounce; the species' ambushing abilities are considered nearly peerless in the animal kingdom by both indigenous people and field researchers and are probably a product of its role as an apex predator in several different environments. The ambush may include leaping into water after prey, as a jaguar is capable of carrying a large kill while swimming; it is strong enough to haul carcasses as large as a heifer up a tree to avoid flood levels. After killing the prey, it drags the carcass to a thicket or other secluded spot. It begins eating at the neck and chest, consumes heart and lungs, followed by the shoulders.

Attacks on humans
The Spanish conquistadors feared the jaguar. According to Charles Darwin, the indigenous peoples of South America stated that people did not need to fear the jaguar as long as capybaras were abundant.
The first official record of a jaguar killing a human in Brazil dates to June 2008.
Two children were attacked by jaguars in Guyana.
The majority of known attacks on people happened when it had been cornered or wounded.